README.md, before:

# T1A3 - Terminal Application - PyPassGen

[Github Repository](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen)  
[Github Project](https://github.com/users/MiloMT/projects/1)

## Purpose

This application is a project to fulfill assignment requirements for the coder academy web development course. It is a terminal application that can be run directly from the command line or with the use of the bash scripts that are contained within this repo.

PyPassGen is a password generator that generates passwords based on set of user provided arguments and has the ability to store and encrypt / decrypt passwords to a computer. The application also uses argparse as a way to receive command line options and arguments to adjust the output. Argparse help documentation has also been written so that a help menu can be displayed by using the '-h' argument. These explanations are also found in the command line arguments heading below.

The encryption and decryption are handled through the Cryptography library which generates a Fernet key. The storage and use of such admittedly is not secure however more secure methods are outside the scope of this project.

## Style Guide

The style guide used for this project is 'Google Python Style Guide' which can be found here: https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html. The code follows this style guide as rigidly as possibly, using black as a recommended code formatter and Google's pylintrc for running a linter over the code.

## Features / Functionality

The application consists of 3 main features:

#### Password Generation

The password generation operates by checking if expressions are used (see below), and checking the flags / options that are passed through as CLI options and arguments. It then generates the password according to these constructors. An explanation of these arguments can be found under the 'Command Line Arguments' heading below. In summation, the user can decide the amount of characters present in the password, the amount of passwords to generate, and what series of characters are present in the password. These are than displayed to the terminal and a flag can be used to copy the entire list immediately to the clipboard if the user would prefer to store these elsewhere.

#### Expressions

There is an option available for the user to create a custom expression to dictate the composition of the generated password. This function will provide a brief description to the user of how an expression is composed and than request for the user to create one of these expressions. The input is checked for invalid characters, and if invalid, will prompt the user to provide another one until the expression matches an expected input.

The list of possible characters to use can be found below:

- [L] lowercase letter
- [U] uppercase letter
- [N] digit
- [S] special character

The function will accept both upper and lowercase characters as it forces the characters to lower on input. Using the above characters, a couple of examples of this are below:

- Expression: llluuunnnsss
- Generated Password: vkxDYS221['#

- Expression: uuuuunnnnn
- Generated Password: TTGTO03879

Each letter represents a random character from that character series.

#### Password storage / Viewing

Once passwords have been generated, the application will than prompt the user on whether they want to save the password or not. If the user confirms this is the case, the application will than check if a 'passwords.txt' file already exists at the current folder destination. If it doesn't, it will create one automatically. If it does, the application will provide to ask the user whether they would like to append the new passwords to the list, or they would like to overwrite the existing passwords.txt. If the overwrite option is chosen and the 'force' flag isn't used, than the application will request confirmation from the user again, mentioning that this will lose any passwords in the current file.

Once the save has been completed, the application will ask whether the user would like to encrypt the saved passwords. If confirmed, the program will first check whether a 'key.txt' file exists in the current directory. If so, it will assume that the 'key.txt' file contains a Fernet key generated by the cryptography library and use that for encryption. If the file doesn't exist, the application will generate a new key and notify the user that it has been created, it will than open the passwords file, encrypt the contents, and overwrite the existing file using the token as a binary object as required for the encryption methodology.

The program can also be used to view or copy passwords from existing 'passwords.txt' files, bearing in mind that if they are encrypted, the 'key.txt' file is required in the current directory. If they are encrypted passwords but the 'key.txt' file is not present, the application will just print out the encrypted string series. A copy flag can also be used with the view functionality to automatically copy all the passwords present in the file after the decryption has taken place.

## Implementation Plan

A github project was created to manage the implementation plan and track key tasks throughout the development of this application. The project can be found at this link: https://github.com/users/MiloMT/projects/1.

This project was updated consistently throughout development to manage the variety of tasks associated with the application. 

*Table Initialization: Part 1*
![Table_231018_Part1](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/2a4de3d2-691c-45b2-b1ed-a138a9c380c4)
*Table Initialization: Part 2*
![Table_231018_Part2](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/acc0fd65-9338-4e37-8e62-03a2e088a4b1)
*Midway through Password Generation*
![Table_231019_MidPassGen](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/efbf68c0-78cd-4380-807a-438d092cda0c)
*End of Password Generation*
![Table_231019_EndPassGen](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/dc0b6999-ee8b-42c8-8b68-7ed52dff1339)
*Inclusion of extra project fields for docs / scripts*
![Table_231025_ExtraFields](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/2c30ba92-5c6d-41fe-a9cf-f545aaccb1ac)
*Updates dependent on task status*
![Table_231025_SaveDescriptions](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/1888f3b6-4d70-4bba-87c7-70b4b4f4762f)
*Getting through password generation*
![Table_231025_PassGenNoEncrypt](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/073cd53f-68f2-4746-8ec9-bfa84ad55f5d)
*Nearly finished expression generation*
![Table_231025_ExpressionDoneExcDocs](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/8bcbd252-e59f-43a8-9f55-499ae24280af)
*Getting through encryption functionality with checklist and comments*
![Table_231025_PassStoreEncryptAdded](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/535cffc6-485a-4357-a9c1-f5270e18ed1f)
*Starting on documentation*
![Table_231026_DocStart](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/7b943b12-8bbf-4635-aa47-e0ddc6049821)
*Extra bash scripts added as required*
![Table_231026_ExtraScriptAdd](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/80516c6c-36b0-4e4e-ad08-9c796352f167)
*Managing Issues through Github Interface*
![Table_231026_GithubIssueManagement](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/6c516490-f476-415b-b20a-16d46e3167e2)

## Installation Instructions

All used packages are compatible with all major operating systems (Windows, MacOS, Linux), so this application can be used across any of these OS's. There are multiple scripts contained within the 'script' folder that can be used for installation and basic use cases of the application (windows specific), or the application can be run directly via the command line. Please note that in order to run the application, you must have Python >= 3.7 version installed for the cryptography library.

#### Scripts

There are two different installation scripts. One that installs the application dependencies within a virtual environment. And than one that installs the dependencies within the base Python installation. Once the installation scripts have been run, than there are three variations of example use cases that can be run depending on the installed environment. One for a basic password generation, one to prompt for password creation, and than lastly one to view existing passwords. Once run, please follow the prompts as required in the terminal interface.

## Command Line Arguments

usage: __main__.py [-h] [-c] [-e] [-f] [-n] [-s] [-u] [--view] [Num_of_Chars] [Num_of_Passwords]  

Generates a password or series of passwords given a set of parameters  

##### positional arguments:  
  Num_of_Chars      Optionally enter a number of characters in password. (default: 10)  
  Num_of_Passwords  Optionally create a number of passwords. (default: 1)  

##### options:  
  -h, --help        : show this help message and exit  
  -c, --copy        : Copies the password to the clipboard once generated or viewed  
  -e, --expression  : Lets the generator know that you want to create an expression to control the password generation  
  -f, --force       : Forces overwrite so app ignores overwrite confirmation  
  -n, --number      : Adds numbers to password generation  
  -s, --special     : Adds special characters to password generation  
  -u, --upper       : Adds uppercase letters to password generation  
  --view            : Instead of generating passwords, prints out passwords to terminal  

## References

#### Non-Standard Libraries

- Cryptography: https://pypi.org/project/cryptography/
- Pyperclip: https://pypi.org/project/pyperclip/

#### Style Guide

- Google Python Style Guide: https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html

Commit message:

Readme added hardware / software requirements.

README.md, after:

# T1A3 - Terminal Application - PyPassGen

[Github Repository](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen)  
[Github Project](https://github.com/users/MiloMT/projects/1)

## Purpose

This application is a project to fulfill assignment requirements for the coder academy web development course. It is a terminal application that can be run directly from the command line or with the use of the bash scripts that are contained within this repo.

PyPassGen is a password generator that generates passwords based on set of user provided arguments and has the ability to store and encrypt / decrypt passwords to a computer. The application also uses argparse as a way to receive command line options and arguments to adjust the output. Argparse help documentation has also been written so that a help menu can be displayed by using the '-h' argument. These explanations are also found in the command line arguments heading below.

The encryption and decryption are handled through the Cryptography library which generates a Fernet key. The storage and use of such admittedly is not secure however more secure methods are outside the scope of this project.

## Style Guide

The style guide used for this project is 'Google Python Style Guide' which can be found here: https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html. The code follows this style guide as rigidly as possibly, using black as a recommended code formatter and Google's pylintrc for running a linter over the code.

## Features / Functionality

The application consists of 3 main features:

#### Password Generation

The password generation operates by checking if expressions are used (see below), and checking the flags / options that are passed through as CLI options and arguments. It then generates the password according to these constructors. An explanation of these arguments can be found under the 'Command Line Arguments' heading below. In summation, the user can decide the amount of characters present in the password, the amount of passwords to generate, and what series of characters are present in the password. These are than displayed to the terminal and a flag can be used to copy the entire list immediately to the clipboard if the user would prefer to store these elsewhere.

#### Expressions

There is an option available for the user to create a custom expression to dictate the composition of the generated password. This function will provide a brief description to the user of how an expression is composed and than request for the user to create one of these expressions. The input is checked for invalid characters, and if invalid, will prompt the user to provide another one until the expression matches an expected input.

The list of possible characters to use can be found below:

- [L] lowercase letter
- [U] uppercase letter
- [N] digit
- [S] special character

The function will accept both upper and lowercase characters as it forces the characters to lower on input. Using the above characters, a couple of examples of this are below:

- Expression: llluuunnnsss
- Generated Password: vkxDYS221['#

- Expression: uuuuunnnnn
- Generated Password: TTGTO03879

Each letter represents a random character from that character series.

#### Password storage / Viewing

Once passwords have been generated, the application will than prompt the user on whether they want to save the password or not. If the user confirms this is the case, the application will than check if a 'passwords.txt' file already exists at the current folder destination. If it doesn't, it will create one automatically. If it does, the application will provide to ask the user whether they would like to append the new passwords to the list, or they would like to overwrite the existing passwords.txt. If the overwrite option is chosen and the 'force' flag isn't used, than the application will request confirmation from the user again, mentioning that this will lose any passwords in the current file.

Once the save has been completed, the application will ask whether the user would like to encrypt the saved passwords. If confirmed, the program will first check whether a 'key.txt' file exists in the current directory. If so, it will assume that the 'key.txt' file contains a Fernet key generated by the cryptography library and use that for encryption. If the file doesn't exist, the application will generate a new key and notify the user that it has been created, it will than open the passwords file, encrypt the contents, and overwrite the existing file using the token as a binary object as required for the encryption methodology.

The program can also be used to view or copy passwords from existing 'passwords.txt' files, bearing in mind that if they are encrypted, the 'key.txt' file is required in the current directory. If they are encrypted passwords but the 'key.txt' file is not present, the application will just print out the encrypted string series. A copy flag can also be used with the view functionality to automatically copy all the passwords present in the file after the decryption has taken place.

## Implementation Plan

A github project was created to manage the implementation plan and track key tasks throughout the development of this application. The project can be found at this link: https://github.com/users/MiloMT/projects/1.

This project was updated consistently throughout development to manage the variety of tasks associated with the application. 

*Table Initialization: Part 1*
![Table_231018_Part1](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/2a4de3d2-691c-45b2-b1ed-a138a9c380c4)
*Table Initialization: Part 2*
![Table_231018_Part2](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/acc0fd65-9338-4e37-8e62-03a2e088a4b1)
*Midway through Password Generation*
![Table_231019_MidPassGen](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/efbf68c0-78cd-4380-807a-438d092cda0c)
*End of Password Generation*
![Table_231019_EndPassGen](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/dc0b6999-ee8b-42c8-8b68-7ed52dff1339)
*Inclusion of extra project fields for docs / scripts*
![Table_231025_ExtraFields](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/2c30ba92-5c6d-41fe-a9cf-f545aaccb1ac)
*Updates dependent on task status*
![Table_231025_SaveDescriptions](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/1888f3b6-4d70-4bba-87c7-70b4b4f4762f)
*Getting through password generation*
![Table_231025_PassGenNoEncrypt](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/073cd53f-68f2-4746-8ec9-bfa84ad55f5d)
*Nearly finished expression generation*
![Table_231025_ExpressionDoneExcDocs](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/8bcbd252-e59f-43a8-9f55-499ae24280af)
*Getting through encryption functionality with checklist and comments*
![Table_231025_PassStoreEncryptAdded](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/535cffc6-485a-4357-a9c1-f5270e18ed1f)
*Starting on documentation*
![Table_231026_DocStart](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/7b943b12-8bbf-4635-aa47-e0ddc6049821)
*Extra bash scripts added as required*
![Table_231026_ExtraScriptAdd](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/80516c6c-36b0-4e4e-ad08-9c796352f167)
*Managing Issues through Github Interface*
![Table_231026_GithubIssueManagement](https://github.com/MiloMT/PyPassGen/assets/60989510/6c516490-f476-415b-b20a-16d46e3167e2)

## Installation Instructions

All used packages are compatible with all major operating systems (Windows, MacOS, Linux), so this application can be used across any of these OS's. There are multiple scripts contained within the 'script' folder that can be used for installation and basic use cases of the application (windows specific), or the application can be run directly via the command line. Please note that in order to run the application, you must have Python >= 3.7 version installed for the cryptography library.

#### Hardware / Software Requirements

The only base requirement for running the application is having Python version >= 3.7 installed on the computer. You can download and install the latest python installation directly through the Python homepage: https://www.python.org/

As for hardware requirements, you need to ensure that your system has the minimum OS versions as below:

- Windows: Windows Vista or newer
- MacOS: MaxOS X 10.9 or newer
- Linux: Dependent on linux distribution, please view the official Python documentation related to your Python version.

#### Scripts

There are two different installation scripts. One that installs the application dependencies within a virtual environment. And than one that installs the dependencies within the base Python installation. Once the installation scripts have been run, than there are three variations of example use cases that can be run depending on the installed environment. One for a basic password generation, one to prompt for password creation, and than lastly one to view existing passwords. Once run, please follow the prompts as required in the terminal interface.

## Command Line Arguments

usage: __main__.py [-h] [-c] [-e] [-f] [-n] [-s] [-u] [--view] [Num_of_Chars] [Num_of_Passwords]  

Generates a password or series of passwords given a set of parameters  

##### positional arguments:  
  Num_of_Chars      Optionally enter a number of characters in password. (default: 10)  
  Num_of_Passwords  Optionally create a number of passwords. (default: 1)  

##### options:  
  -h, --help        : show this help message and exit  
  -c, --copy        : Copies the password to the clipboard once generated or viewed  
  -e, --expression  : Lets the generator know that you want to create an expression to control the password generation  
  -f, --force       : Forces overwrite so app ignores overwrite confirmation  
  -n, --number      : Adds numbers to password generation  
  -s, --special     : Adds special characters to password generation  
  -u, --upper       : Adds uppercase letters to password generation  
  --view            : Instead of generating passwords, prints out passwords to terminal  

## References

#### Non-Standard Libraries

- Cryptography: https://pypi.org/project/cryptography/
- Pyperclip: https://pypi.org/project/pyperclip/

#### Style Guide

- Google Python Style Guide: https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html
